Often sites don't authenticate solely on a single piece of
evidence and require additional evidence,
like a security pin or security questions.
So let's mandate the user to also provide a security
pin in addition to the password.
Let's do a refresh from module 2 and go for the
components you would need to update, store the pin in a one-way hash,
like bcrypt, in an identity store during user registration,
modify the UserDetailsService to retrieve the pin,
and add it to the UserDetails object, retrieve the pin submitted by the user,
and add it to the authentication request and an AuthenticationProvider
that also considers the pin during authentication.
Let's implement these changes.
First, we add the security pin to the login page,
treating it just like a password.
The authentication filter creates an authentication request object
with the credentials submitted during login.
To also include the pin,
we can use the getDetails property on the Authentication object.
It returns a type Object where additional details
required for authentication can be placed.
For a web application, by default,
it is populated with an object of type WebAuthenticationDetails.
We can create our own implementation,
and the easiest way is to simply extend the
WebAuthenticationDetails class and include the security pin,
which we can retrieve from the HTTP request.
The WebAuthenticationDetails is built by a class
called WebAuthenticationDetailsSource.
So let's create a class that extends this and returns our new
additional AuthenticationDetails object.
Now in our Configuration class, we can set our new authenticationDetailsSource.
Hence,
now the AuthenticationProvider will be able to retrieve the
AdditionalAuthenticationDetails object using the getDetails method
and retrieve the pin the user submitted.
Let's add the pin to the registration page also and
the UserDto and UserEntity objects.
In the RegistrationController,
it is important we also encode the pin using bcrypt,
just like the password.
Okay,
let's now update the UserDetailsService to retrieve the pin
and add it to the UserDetails object.
Currently, we are using Spring's implementation of UserDetails.
Rather than create a completely new class that implements UserDetails,
simply extend the concrete user class, Spring's default implementation,
and include the securityPin.
We need a constructor to call the super class to populate the other
credentials and expose the pin with a getter and setter method.
In the UserDetailsService,
we can now create a new instance of multi-factor authentication
user class using the constructor to populate the credentials and
the setter to populate the pin, returning the new UserDetails implementation.
We now have the pin submitted by the user in the AuthenticationRequest object
and the pin from the identity store on the UserDetails object.
We now need an AuthenticationProvider that will
match them during authentication.
Now the default AuthenticationProvider is the DaoAuthenticationProvider.
It has a method, additionalAuthenticationChecks,
which is called after the username and password is authenticated.
Here we can add our logic to also match the pins.
To do this,
we can create a class that extends the DaoAuthenticationProvider and
override the additionalAuthenticationChecks method.
First, we call this super implementation of the method.
Next,
we retrieve the AdditionalAuthenticationDetails from the
authentication object's getDetails method,
retrieve the pin, and match them.
If they don't match, we throw a BadCredentialsException.
Otherwise, we set the pin to null as we no longer need it,
reducing the chances of it being exposed in later processing.
Add the Component annotation to our new provider and autowire
the UserDetailsService and PasswordEncoder.
Now to add a new AuthenticationProvider to the AuthenticationManager,
in this SecurityConfiguration class,
we override the configure method that exposes the
AuthenticationManagerBuilder object and set the new
AuthenticationProvider that we wired into our Configuration class.
That's it.
When the AuthenticationManager is initialized by Spring Boot,
the builder will assign the new AuthenticationProvider to it.
So let's register a new user and give this a test.
Looks good.
One final note.
An additional pin or security questions does make it
more difficult for potential hackers.
It does, however, increase the complexity for some users,
and some users might also want additional security,
such as two- factor authentication. In the next section, you will learn how to set this up.